# AnimalTrackID: Wildlife Insights from Footprints

## Abstract
Wildlife tracking is the science that facilitates identifying and interpreting the signs of animal activity and provides accurate and localized observations amid a changing world (Esri, 2023). The benefits of wildlife tracking underscore its importance in wildlife conservation—it unpacks information relating not only to species identification and recognition but also to population dynamics, migration patterns, habitat use, and the effects of environmental changes. Most traditional wildlife tracking methods, such as collaring, banding, and GPS tracking, are invasive methods that require physical interaction with wildlife, potentially causing stress or disrupting its natural behavior. In addition, these methods are expensive and logistically challenging. However, the impressions left by the foot of terrestrial animals provide a noninvasive alternative to traditional wildlife tracking methods. Despite its potential, building machine learning models for wildlife tracking remains a daunting challenge due to the absence of a comprehensive and well-labeled dataset. This leaves researchers and conservationists without a scalable, cost-effective tool for tracking wildlife.

This project, ‘AnimalTrackID: Wildlife Insights from Footprints,’ seeks to amplify the need for the curation of a comprehensive dataset of animal footprints by leveraging the first publicly available open-source dataset obtained with permission from Risa Shinoda, co-author of  OpenAnimalTracks: A Dataset for Animal Track Recognition (Shinoda & Shiohara, 2024). This dataset will be used to develop a machine learning model to classify animal footprints, aiding in species identification and providing insights into their movement patterns and habitat usage. It remains an utmost desire to create the need and the adoption of machine learning models for wildlife tracking within Africa and the world - thereby giving the conservation sector a non-invasive method of wildlife tracking while laying down a foundation for future research and development of AI models.

